KEP-4368: Job API managed-by label (#4370)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-apps/4368-support-managed-by-label-for-batch-jobs/README.md

- [ ] (R) KEP approvers have approved the KEP status as `implementable`
- [ ] (R) Design details are appropriately documented
- [ ] (R) Test plan is in place, giving consideration to SIG Architecture and SIG Testing input (including test refactors)
  - [ ] e2e Tests for all Beta API Operations (endpoints)
  - [ ] (R) Ensure GA e2e tests meet requirements for [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md)
  - [ ] (R) Minimum Two Week Window for GA e2e tests to prove flake free
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
  - [ ] (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md)
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]

> - [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

Reviewer: The appropriate boxes should be :heavy_check_mark:

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

We support the `managed-by` label as a lightweight mechanism to delegate the Job
synchronization to an external controller.

## Motivation

As a part of [Kueue](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs) (an effort done by
Batch-WG, in cooperation with SIG-Autoscaling, SIG-Scheduling, SIG-Apps and SIG-Node) we
are working on a multi-cluster job dispatcher project, called

> [MultiKueue](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/pull/1380).

Reviewer: Maybe link to https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/blob/main/keps/693-multikueue/README.md will be better?

Author: Sure, it just wasn't merged at first iteration, updated.

In the MultiKueue design, which follows manager-worker architecture, a user
creates a Job in the management cluster, but a mirror-copy of the Job is created
and executed in one of the worker clusters. The status updates of the mirror-Job
are reflected by the Kueue controller in the management cluster, in the status
of the Job created by the user.

In order to support this workflow we need a mechanism to disable the main Job
controller, and delegate the status synchronization to the Kueue controller.

### Goals

> - support delegation of Job synchronization to an external controller

Reviewer: I remember the biggest concern I had, when we discussed this in-private was about mirroring jobs to several workers. Iow. the main job (providing a status) can potentially be executed on several worker nodes. I haven't seen anywhere in the proposal explicitly called that situation out, with information that we don't expect that scenario to be the target of this proposal.

Author: In MultiKuuee we have a simple design, where each Job executes fully within a single worker, and the status is mirrored back to the management cluster. In the long-run we may consider using JobSet to execute different Jobs on different workers, but there are no concrete design plans for this yet.

I would be happy to open a PR to mention that explicitly as a non-goal in the MultiKueue KEP (cc @mwielgus ), 

However, I don't see how we could prevent someone potentially distributing a job across multiple workers, once the label is supported, so it does not feel like goal/ non-goal for this KEP. WDYT?

Reviewer 2: It's a non-goal for MultiKueue, but we cannot say the same for the `managed-by` label. We simply can't control how others make use of the label.

Maybe we can put it in the Notes section? But the most we can say is that the status updates will have to pass API validation.

Author: On a related note: added a section on the possibly missing API validation rules. Let me know if some might be missing.

Author: Added an explicit non-goal to the MultiKueue design and the note in this KEP to explain what we are doing, and that we aim for simplicity and debuggability. That is all we can do I think.

### Non-Goals

- passing custom parameters to the external controller

## Proposal

The proposal is to support the `managed-by` label to indicate the only
controller responsible for the Job object synchronization.

### User Stories (Optional)

#### Story 1

As a developer of Kueue I want to have Job API which allows me to implement the
MultiKueue design. For this reason I need a way to disable the main Job
controller on the management cluster.

The mechanism should be per-Job, because the management cluster might also be
one of the worker clusters, for two reasons:

> 1. Disabling the Job controller per cluster requires access the `kube-controller-manager`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Disabling the Job controller per cluster requires access to the `kube-controller-manager`
```

Author: Done

   manifest. Such access is generally discouraged by cloud providers.
2. The management cluster may also be a worker. Supporting this scenario is important
   for smooth transition of Kueue users from a single-cluster to multi-cluster.

> Ideally, I prefer the mechanism to be lightweight so that it is easy to be adopted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ideally, the mechanism should be lightweight so that it is easy to be adopted
```

feature with similar characteristics.

Finally, we would like to have the feature soak without unnecessary delay.

#### Can the label be mutable?

There is a potential risk of leaking pods, if the value of the label is changed.
For example, assume there is a running Job, which is reconciled by the Job
controller, and has some pods created.
Then, if the label is switched to the mirroring Kueue controller (which by
itself does not manage pods). Then, the pods are leaking and remain running.

In order to avoid the risk of pods leaking between the controllers when changing
value of the `managed-by` label, we make the label immutable (allow to be added
on Job creation, but fail requests trying to update its value, see also
[label mutability](#label-mutability)).

However, the question remains if we can make the label mutable when the job is
stopped, similarly, as we do with the `AllowMutableSchedulingDirectives` flag
which guards mutability of the Job's pod template labels.

It seems possible, and could be handy in [Story 1](#story-1), but it is also not
a blocker.

> It would also the complicate debuggability of the feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It would also complicate debuggability of the feature.
```

We decide to keep the label immutable, at least for [Beta](#beta), we will

> re-evaluate the decision for [GA](#ga).

Reviewer: :+1:

### Risks and Mitigations

#### Ecosystem fragmentation due to forks

The mechanism to disable the main Job controller opens the door for users to
substitute it with a fork. This may create more fragmentation in the community
as users may prefer to use their forked controllers rather than contribute
upstream.

First, this risk, to some extent, exists even today as admins with access to the

> control plane can disable by passing `--controllers=-job,*` in the manifest for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
control plane can disable job controller by passing `--controllers=-job,*` in the manifest for
```

already introduced dedicated Job CRDs for their needs.

#### Two controllers running at the same time on old version

It is possible that one configures MultiKueue (or another project) with an
older version of k8s which does not support the label yet. In that case
two controllers might start running and compete with Job status updates at the
same time.

Note that an analogous situation may happen when the version of Kubernetes
already supports the label, but the feature gate is disabled in `kube-controller-manager`.

To mitigate this risk we warn about it in Kueue documentation, to use this label
only against newer versions of Kubernetes.

Finally, this risk will fade away with time as the new versions of
Kubernetes support it.

#### Debuggability

With this mechanism new failure modes can occur. For example, a user may make
a typo in the label value, or the cluster administrator may not install the
custom controller (like MultiKueue) on that cluster.

In such cases the user may not observe any progress by the job for a long time
and my need to debug the Job.

In order to allow for debugging of situations like this the Job controller will

> put a log line indicating the synchronization is delegated to another controller

Reviewer: Maybe event/condition (or both) something more visible to a user would be better. Log lines are only accessible to cluster administrators, although it should still log that information.

Author: Indeed, the point was already raised here: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4370#discussion_r1453688327. I would suggest to keep the discussion in one thread.

(see [implementation overview](#implementation-overview)).

> Additionally, before re-evaluate extending the `kubectl` command-line tool

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, re-evaluate extending the `kubectl` command-line tool
```

##### e2e tests

The feature does not depend on kubelet, so the functionality can be fully
covered with unit & integration tests.

We propose a single e2e test for the following scenario:
- the Job controller does not reconcile a job with any other value of the `managed-by` label

### Graduation Criteria

#### Beta

- skip synchronization of jobs when the `managed-by` label does not exist, or equals `job-controller.k8s.io`
- unit & integration tests
- The feature flag enabled by default

#### GA

- Address reviews and bug reports from Beta users
- e2e test
- Re-evaluate the ideas of improving debuggability (like [extended `kubectl`](#debuggability), [dedicated condition](#condition-to-indicated-job-is-skipped), or [events](#event-indicating-the-job-is-skipped))
- Re-evaluate the support for mutability of the label
- Lock the feature gate

#### Deprecation

- Remove the feature-gate in GA+2.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

#### Upgrade

An upgrade to a version which supports this feature does not require any
additional configuration changes. This feature is opt-in at the Job-level, so
to use it users need to add the `managed-by` label to their Jobs.

#### Downgrade

> A downgrade to a version which does not support this feature does not require

Reviewer: What about the downgrade to a version w/o this feature, ie. 1.29?

Author: This is what the paragraph was about, added a note in brackets about 1.29 or below specifically.

Also, mentioned the risk of running 2 controllers.

any additional configuration changes. All jobs, including these that
specified a custom value for `managed-by`, will be handled in the default
way by the Job controller.

<!--
If applicable, how will the component be upgraded and downgraded? Make sure
this is in the test plan.

Consider the following in developing an upgrade/downgrade strategy for this
enhancement:
- What changes (in invocations, configurations, API use, etc.) is an existing
  cluster required to make on upgrade, in order to maintain previous behavior?
- What changes (in invocations, configurations, API use, etc.) is an existing
  cluster required to make on upgrade, in order to make use of the enhancement?
-->

### Version Skew Strategy

> N/A. This feature is limited to control plane. Also, This feature doesn't

Reviewer: What about when you're half-way through upgrade and you're running mixed kcms, where some are still on v1.29 and others v1.30?

Author: Looking at https://kubernetes.io/releases/version-skew-policy/#kube-controller-manager-kube-scheduler-and-cloud-controller-manager I'm not sure we support running kube-controller-manager in HA mode. I assume only one of them is the leader performing the operations. When api-servers are in HA mode, and are skewed, then the old one can let the label to be mutated.

Reviewer 2: I think the point is that the kcm in an older version might be the leader, in which case it wouldn't understand that it has to skip reconciling the Job. There isn't much we can do here, I think, other than recommending users not to use the feature during an ongoing upgrade.

Author: I see, added a paragraph along the lines in this section. PTAL.

<!--
What signals should users be paying attention to when the feature is young
that might indicate a serious problem?
-->

###### Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?

<!--
Describe manual testing that was done and the outcomes.
Longer term, we may want to require automated upgrade/rollback tests, but we
are missing a bunch of machinery and tooling and can't do that now.
-->
It will be tested manually prior to beta launch.

###### Is the rollout accompanied by any deprecations and/or removals of features, APIs, fields of API types, flags, etc.?

<!--
Even if applying deprecation policies, they may still surprise some users.
-->

No.

### Monitoring Requirements

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.

For GA, this section is required: approvers should be able to confirm the
previous answers based on experience in the field.
-->

###### How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?

<!--
Ideally, this should be a metric. Operations against the Kubernetes API (e.g.,
checking if there are objects with field X set) may be a last resort. Avoid
logs or events for this purpose.
-->

> Check if a Job has the `managed-by` label.

Reviewer: This question is from the cluster-admin level, iow. don't expect admins to go through all the jobs looking for the label. They should have a higher-level information available. See my comment about exposing information when using external controller.

Author: Sure, added the answer using the newly proposed metric

###### How can someone using this feature know that it is working for their instance?

<!--
For instance, if this is a pod-related feature, it should be possible to determine if the feature is functioning properly
for each individual pod.
Pick one more of these and delete the rest.
Please describe all items visible to end users below with sufficient detail so that they can verify correct enablement
and operation of this feature.
Recall that end users cannot usually observe component logs or access metrics.
-->

- [ ] Events
  - Event Reason:
- [X] API .metadata
  - Condition name:
  - Other field:
    - `.metadata.labels['batch.kubernetes.io/managed-by']` for Jobs
- [ ] Other (treat as last resort)
  - Details:

###### What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the enhancement?

> This feature does not propose SLOs.

Reviewer: I'd expect the SLO to be consistent with the current SLO for the job controller, not sure if we have them defined. But we need to make sure that it should not get worse.

Author: We have some SLO: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/sig-scalability/slos/slos.md, but non of them look specific to Job controller. I don't expect any of them being impacted, will add the note.

as users may prefer to use their forked controllers rather than contribute
upstream.

First, this risk, to some extent, exists even today as admins with access to the
control plane can disable by passing `controllers=-job,*` in the manifest for of
`kube-controller-manager`.

Second, we believe that users who had the need to fork the Job controller
already introduced dedicated Job CRDs for their needs.

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

#### API

```golang
const (
  ...
	// LabelManagedBy is used to indicate the controller or entity that manages
	// an Job.

> 	LabelManagedBy = "batch.kubernetes.io/managed-by"

Reviewer 3: I like the simplicity of the surface area here. Some benefits of the label approach over a field:
* it generalizes to custom resources as well
* it could consistently live in the same place in multiple objects (all objects have metadata.labels)

The main downside I see is that there's no signal in openapi whether the cluster is new enough to be aware of the controller subdivision. That's largely a problem time would cure.

I wonder if it would make sense to teach all the core workload controllers a generic version of this (`kubernetes.io/managed-by`) on their parent objects. That would enable use of multiple controllers on the same type, with the default (no managed-by label) meaning "use the default controller for this type".

Author: Thank you!

> The main downside I see is that there's no signal in openapi whether the cluster is new enough to be aware of the controller subdivision. That's largely a problem time would cure.

Indeed, I added a note on the related risk in the  [Two controllers running at the same time on old version](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/e2b8c22bd2912d61b4f99b4ae5aa94f2b044ada7/keps/sig-apps/4368-support-managed-by-label-for-batch-jobs/README.md#two-controllers-running-at-the-same-time-on-old-version) section

Reviewer: > I wonder if it would make sense to teach all the core workload controllers a generic version of this (`kubernetes.io/managed-by`) on their parent objects. That would enable use of multiple controllers on the same type, with the default (no managed-by label) meaning "use the default controller for this type".

@atiratree this ^ would probably be a good goal for sig-apps long term to address.

Reviewer 4: It is an interesting idea. I suppose we could consider it, if there were clear benefits and a clearly defined process and contract for the ownership.

The downsides mentioned in this KEP are still quite significant to support this in all controllers. I think CRDs are still preferable for extending workloads like Deployments, StatefulSets, etc.

I know we have conformance tests, but that doesn't stop people from forking the controllers and implementing incompatible behavior. And API validation has its limits. This would then be problematic for the consumers of these workloads who would either be unprepared and unable to react in a safe and bug-free manner. And if they could, they would need extra logic and switch the behavior according to the current controller. They would also run into a similar problem if they found a controller they do not support.

As we see for example with StatefulSets and their need for migration. I expect the same need to arise for these controllers. E.g. I want to migrate from a controller A to a controller B for a new shiny functionality. So sooner or later we might make the managed label/field mutable. This would probably require some kind of locking, so that two controller would not operate on the same object. Even in mid change. And to consider rogue controllers.

The benefit for Jobs is that it is used as a building block in many projects, and we do not expect people to fork the controller. Not sure if this applies elsewhere.

@mimowo can we add the following to the GA graduation criteria?

Asses the fragmentation of the ecosystem. Look for other implementations of a job controller and asses their conformance with k8s.

Author: Makes sense, added the point.

Reviewer: > Regarding the generic `kubernetes.io/managed-by` label. I would like to defer it for this KEP.

Generic is definitely outside the scope of this KEP.

)
```

#### Implementation overview

In the [Beta](#beta) iteration of the feature we skip synchronization of the
Jobs with the `managed-by` label, if it has any different value than `job-controller`.

> We also default the label for all newly created jobs, to avoid implicit defaults.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure about *requiring* the label on all jobs. I was expecting the *normal* default controller to keep working as-is for jobs without the label, and to switch to excluding jobs with the label, without needing to decorate or modify *any* existing jobs. That would mean that only exceptional jobs that wanted to be managed by a non-default controller would opt into the label.

> We also default the label for all newly created jobs

Does this mean 1) we'd set a label on a job created by a user, or 2) our controllers that create jobs (e.g. cronjob controller) would populate a label? If 1, is there precedence for that? What component would default that and how would it know what job controller name the "default" controller was running as?

Reviewer 5: I don't think we want to change the fact that we're using shared-informers. If that is true, then simple "if skip" is the only path forward.

These may be defined in terms of API maturity, [feature gate] graduations, or as
something else. The KEP should keep this high-level with a focus on what
signals will be looked at to determine graduation.

Consider the following in developing the graduation criteria for this enhancement:
- [Maturity levels (`alpha`, `beta`, `stable`)][maturity-levels]
- [Feature gate][feature gate] lifecycle
- [Deprecation policy][deprecation-policy]

Clearly define what graduation means by either linking to the [API doc
definition](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/kubernetes-api/#api-versioning)
or by redefining what graduation means.

In general we try to use the same stages (alpha, beta, GA), regardless of how the
functionality is accessed.

[feature gate]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/feature-gates.md
[maturity-levels]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api_changes.md#alpha-beta-and-stable-versions
[deprecation-policy]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-policy/

Below are some examples to consider, in addition to the aforementioned [maturity levels][maturity-levels].

> #### Alpha

Reviewer 6: Is there a reason or some background as to why this is going straight to beta?

Author: The base-functionality implementation is very simple, just short-circuit the `syncJob` invocation. Also, I think going via Alpha is a way to allow for [version skew between kube-apiservers in HA setup](https://kubernetes.io/releases/version-skew-policy/#supported-version-skew). To ensure that all apiserver instances recognize the new field. However, since this is a label, there is no such need technically.

Finally, we would like to have the feature soak without unnecessary delay. 

I have added a note along the lines. PTAL.

Kubernetes support it.

#### Debuggability

With this mechanism new failure modes can occur. For example, a user may make
a typo in the label value, or the cluster administrator may not install the
custom controller (like MultiKueue) on that cluster.

In such cases the user may not observe any progress by the job for a long time
and my need to debug the Job.

In order to allow for debugging of situations like this the Job controller will
put a log line indicating the synchronization is delegated to another controller
(see [implementation overview](#implementation-overview)).

Additionally, re-evaluate extending the `kubectl` command-line tool
before [GA](#ga). We could extend the command to provide useful debugging
information with the following:
- new `MANAGED_BY` column for `kubectl get job -owide` (possibly also without `-owide`)
- a line in the `kubectl describe job` output, just before the list of events,
providing a user readable information if the Job is synchronized by a custom
controller.

Alternative ideas considered were
[a dedicated condition](#condition-to-indicated-job-is-skipped)
and [events](#event-indicating-the-job-is-skipped).

> #### Custom controllers not compatible with API assumptions by CronJob

Author: @atiratree responding to your question here:

> @mimowo the KEP looks good, but I do not see any considerations regarding the cronjob. Do we support setting this label to jobs in cronjob's jobTemplate?
> 
> If we do. Are there any changes required to the cronjob controller? What happens when the managing controller of the job is unresponsive or does not exist? Or when it syncs the job's status incorrectly? Do we need any consistency checks in the cronjob controller or observability on this? And it might be worth adding some tests for this as well.

First, we want to support setting `managed-by` on the `jobTemplate`. As also discussed during the wg-batch meeting the CronJob makes some assumptions about the Job Status API, that are satisfied by the Job contoller, but they are not guaranteed to be satisfied by custom controllers, adding new potential failure modes.

I added this section and a section in Design details to propose strengthening the validation to satisfy the CronJob requirements. PTAL.

Reviewer 4: Thanks for adding this. 

Non sure how deep we should to go into the job controller and how many constraints we should include in the validation as it may not always be future proof. But having the obvious validation and validation that CronJob depends on is a good step.

Currently, the validation of the Job status API is rather relaxed, allowing for
potential situations, when modified by custom controllers, which might be
problematic for the API consumers, like the built-in CronJob controller.

In particular, the CronJob relies on the assumption that the `CompletionTime`

> is only set to successful jobs. Also, that a job does not flip its state from

Reviewer 3: strengthening this is fine, though be careful to tolerate an existing completionTime value on a non-successful job (and I'd also recommending making cronjob more resilient to a value here by explicitly doing the check for success as well)

Author: sgtm, added a point about making the CronJob more resilient

Complete to Failed (or the other way round). Also, a finished job should not

> flip back to non-finished.

Reviewer 3: agree on strengthening the validation to prevent invalid transitions like this

Reviewer: Strong :+1:, if we're planning to allow external controllers update the status, we need to ensure that job won't start flapping between states.

## Design Details

#### API

```golang
const (
  ...
	// LabelManagedBy is used to indicate the controller or entity that manages
	// an Job.
	LabelManagedBy = "batch.kubernetes.io/managed-by"
)
```

#### Implementation overview

We skip synchronization of the Jobs with the `managed-by` label, if it has any
different value than `job-controller.k8s.io`. When the synchronization is skipped,
the name of the controller managing the Job object is logged.

We leave the particular place at which the synchronization is skipped as
implementation detail which can be determined during the implementation phase,
however, two candidate places are:
1. inside `syncJob` function
2. inside `enqueueSyncJobInternal` function

Note that, if we skip inside `enqueueSyncJobInternal` we may save on some memory
needed to needlessly enqueue the Job keys.

There is no validation for the values of the field beyond that of standard
permitted label values.

#### Job status validation

We will add the following validation rules, which are currently satisfied by the
built-in Job controller, to mitigate the risk of [here](#custom-controllers-not-compatible-with-api-assumptions-by-cronjob):

> - the `CompletionTime` field is only set for jobs with `Failed` condition (per

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- the `CompletionTime` field is only set for jobs with `Succeeded` condition (per
```

  [API comment](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/48b68582b89b0ae9ad4d435516b2dd5943f48cd3/pkg/apis/batch/types.go#L436)).
- once the `Failed=True` or `Complete=True` conditions are added, their status

>   cannot be changed. They are also mutually exclusive.

Reviewer 2: Also:
The format of completedIndexes and failedIndexes. Maybe even that indexes have to be within the range of completions.

Author: Added this point

denote sections that are under active debate as follows:

```
<<[UNRESOLVED optional short context or usernames ]>>
Stuff that is being argued.
<<[/UNRESOLVED]>>
```

When editing KEPS, aim for tightly-scoped, single-topic PRs to keep discussions
focused. If you disagree with what is already in a document, open a new PR
with suggested changes.

One KEP corresponds to one "feature" or "enhancement" for its whole lifecycle.
You do not need a new KEP to move from beta to GA, for example. If
new details emerge that belong in the KEP, edit the KEP. Once a feature has become
"implemented", major changes should get new KEPs.

The canonical place for the latest set of instructions (and the likely source
of this file) is [here](/keps/NNNN-kep-template/README.md).

**Note:** Any PRs to move a KEP to `implementable`, or significant changes once
it is marked `implementable`, must be approved by each of the KEP approvers.
If none of those approvers are still appropriate, then changes to that list
should be approved by the remaining approvers and/or the owning SIG (or
SIG Architecture for cross-cutting KEPs).
-->
# KEP-4368: Support managed-by label for Jobs

> <!--

Reviewer 7: nit: could you remove the comments if you don't need them anymore.

Author: Indeed, removing the comments makes it easier to read during review without formatting. I clean up the comments from the most obvious sections, leaving some comments in the PRR section where the interpretation is less obvious so that the comments can be handy for reviewers.

[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

<!--
This section is incredibly important for producing high-quality, user-focused
documentation such as release notes or a development roadmap. It should be
possible to collect this information before implementation begins, in order to
avoid requiring implementors to split their attention between writing release
notes and implementing the feature itself. KEP editors and SIG Docs
should help to ensure that the tone and content of the `Summary` section is
useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.

Both in this section and below, follow the guidelines of the [documentation
style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

We support the `managed-by` label as a lightweight mechanism to delegate the Job
synchronization to an external controller.

## Motivation

As a part of [Kueue](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs) (an effort done by

> Batch-WG, in cooperation with SIG-Autoscaling, SIG-Scheduling and SIG-Apps) we

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Batch-WG, in cooperation with SIG-Node, SIG-Autoscaling, SIG-Scheduling and SIG-Apps) we
```
If you are mentioning all the SIGs involved in Batch-WG.

control plane can disable by passing `controllers=-job,*` in the manifest for of
`kube-controller-manager`.

Second, we believe that users who had the need to fork the Job controller
already introduced dedicated Job CRDs for their needs.

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

#### API

```golang
const (
  ...
	// LabelManagedBy is used to indicate the controller or entity that manages
	// an Job.
	LabelManagedBy = "batch.kubernetes.io/managed-by"
)
```

#### Implementation overview

In the [Beta](#beta) iteration of the feature we skip synchronization of the

> Jobs with the `managed-by` label, if it has any different value than `job-controller`.

Reviewer 3: One question is what happens if the label is mutated on an existing job? From the point of view of a controller filtering on a label selector, that will result in a "delete" event if the label mutates to no longer match its selector.

Reviewer 5: Given that all our controllers are using SharedInformers anyway, I don't think that setting a selector is even possible. So the only thing we can effectively handle differently events where the label is set and that means that we will effectively be handling update in those cases.

Author: I give up on the idea of using label selectors, added them to the alternatives section, along with the reason why. The main point is that we cannot really use them to make memory gains due to used shared-informers. They are also much more complex conceptually.

We also default the label for all newly created jobs, to avoid implicit defaults.

> There is no validation for the values of the field.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There is no validation for the values of the field beyond that of standard permitted label values.
```

[deprecation-policy]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-policy/

Below are some examples to consider, in addition to the aforementioned [maturity levels][maturity-levels].

#### Alpha

- Feature implemented behind a feature flag
- Initial e2e tests completed and enabled

**Note:** Generally we also wait at least two releases between beta and
GA/stable, because there's no opportunity for user feedback, or even bug reports,
in back-to-back releases.

**For non-optional features moving to GA, the graduation criteria must include
[conformance tests].**

[conformance tests]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md

#### Deprecation

- Announce deprecation and support policy of the existing flag
- Two versions passed since introducing the functionality that deprecates the flag (to address version skew)
- Address feedback on usage/changed behavior, provided on GitHub issues
- Deprecate the flag
-->

#### Beta

- skip synchronization of jobs when the `managed-by` label does not exist, or equals `job-controller`
- default the value of the `managed-by` label for newly created jobs
- unit & integration tests

> - The feature flag enabled by default

Reviewer 7: I think you should probably have e2e tests in beta also.

Author: The feature does not depend on kubelet, so the e2e does not bring much value. It is probably good to have one for completeness, but I think one for GA is enough. The similar strategy was applied for the `JobReadyPods` feature. 

I have added a note in the e2e tests section.

Reviewer 7: I was trying to get some clarity on when/if e2e tests are required for initial release. @aojea has pointed out to me that we should be trying to add e2e tests as early as possible. 

For alpha I think that would mean running them in e2e jobs where alpha feature gates are turned on.

I can see the argument that this is only about adding a label in the controller-manager so integration should cover both apiserver + controller-manager communication.

## Design Details

#### API

```golang
const (
  ...
	// LabelManagedBy is used to indicate the controller or entity that manages
	// an Job.
	LabelManagedBy = "batch.kubernetes.io/managed-by"
)
```

#### Implementation overview

We skip synchronization of the Jobs with the `managed-by` label, if it has any
different value than `job-controller.k8s.io`. When the synchronization is skipped,
the name of the controller managing the Job object is logged.

We leave the particular place at which the synchronization is skipped as
implementation detail which can be determined during the implementation phase,
however, two candidate places are:
1. inside `syncJob` function
2. inside `enqueueSyncJobInternal` function

Note that, if we skip inside `enqueueSyncJobInternal` we may save on some memory
needed to needlessly enqueue the Job keys.

There is no validation for the values of the field beyond that of standard
permitted label values.

#### Job status validation

We will add the following validation rules, which are currently satisfied by the
built-in Job controller, to mitigate the risk of [here](#custom-controllers-not-compatible-with-api-assumptions-by-cronjob):

> - the `CompletionTime` field is only set for jobs with `Succeeded` condition (per
>   [API comment](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/48b68582b89b0ae9ad4d435516b2dd5943f48cd3/pkg/apis/batch/types.go#L436)).

Reviewer 4: should not be modified as well, right?
```suggestion
- the `CompletionTime` field is only set for jobs with `Complete` condition (per
  [API comment](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/48b68582b89b0ae9ad4d435516b2dd5943f48cd3/pkg/apis/batch/types.go#L436)) and cannot be changed once set.
```

high level (needs more precise definitions) those may be things like:
  - per-day percentage of API calls finishing with 5XX errors <= 1%
  - 99% percentile over day of absolute value from (job creation time minus expected
    job creation time) for cron job <= 10%
  - 99.9% of /health requests per day finish with 200 code

These goals will help you determine what you need to measure (SLIs) in the next
question.
-->

###### What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine the health of the service?

<!--
Pick one more of these and delete the rest.
-->

- [x] Metrics
  - Metric name:
    - `apiserver_request_total[code=409, resource=job, group=batch]` (existing):
if the metric increases, while there are Jobs using custom values of `managed-by`
label, it may be indicative of two controllers stepping onto each-other causing
conflicts (see [here](#two-controllers-running-at-the-same-time-on-old-version)).
    - `job_by_external_controller_total` (new), with the `controllerName` label
corresponding to the custom value of the `managed-by` label: if the metric does
not report any jobs for the external controllers, but there are jobs with custom

> `managed-by` label if might be indicative of the feature not working correctly.

Reviewer 4: @mimowo Thanks for clarifying this. Nevertheless, ` (the jobs with custom managed-by label are not skipped by the built-in controller` sounds more like a bug to me than SLI. We do not expect this to fail.

> `managed-by` label if might be indicative of the feature not working correctly.

Author: I see, makes sense. I have revisited the whole paragraph based on this comment. PTAL.

> `managed-by` label if might be indicative of the feature not working correctly.

Reviewer 4: looks good, but it may be better to be more concrete. 

`the service health` -> `the health of a job and its controller`

> `managed-by` label if might be indicative of the feature not working correctly.

Author: Applied the suggestion

- `pkg/registry/batch/job`: `2023-12-20` - `92.2%`
- `pkg/apis/batch/validation`: `2024-01-22` - `98.0%`
- `pkg/apis/batch/v1`: `2023-12-20` - `29.3%` (mostly generated code)

The following scenarios are covered:
- the Job controller reconciles jobs with the `managed-by` label equal to `job-controller.k8s.io` when the feature is enabled
- the Job controller reconciles jobs without the `managed-by` label when the feature is enabled
- the Job controller does not reconcile jobs with custom value of the `managed-by` label when the feature is enabled
- the Job controller reconciles jobs with custom `managed-by` label when the feature gate is disabled
- verify the label is immutable, both when the job is suspended or unsuspended; when the feature is enabled
- enablement / disablement of the feature after the Job (with custom `managed-by` label) is created
- verify the new Job Status API validation rules (see [here](#job-status-validation))

##### Integration tests

The following scenarios are covered:
- the Job controller reconciles jobs with the `managed-by` label equal to `job-controller.k8s.io`
- the Job controller reconciles jobs without the `managed-by` label

> - the Job controller does not reconcile a job with any other value of the `managed-by` label

Reviewer 4: better to mention both?

- [x] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
  - [ ] (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md)
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [x] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

We support the `managed-by` label as a lightweight mechanism to delegate the Job

> synchronization to an external controller.

Reviewer 8: Official labels are public, so it'd be `job.kubernetes.io/managed-by` or similar. Don't use a private label (one with no `/` character separating a DNS domain from the rest of the key).

Author: Sure, makes sense, the full name of the proposed label is `batch.kubernetes.io/managed-by`. And it was mentioned in the Design details. However, I admit it could be confusing as troughout the KEP the name is `managed-by` in skewed quotes suggesting this is the technical name. 

To minimize the changes of confusion of other readers:
- I mention early in the proposal that the full name is `batch.kubernetes.io/managed-by`
- replace the skew quotes with " to make it less technical when used in various places of the text

Still, I think it is ok to call it just "managed-by" in most places of the text, because otherwise it looks verbose, and "managed-by" reads better. PTAL.

## Motivation

As a part of [Kueue](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs) (an effort done by

> Batch-WG, in cooperation with SIG-Autoscaling, SIG-Scheduling, SIG-Apps and SIG-Node) we

Reviewer 8: (nit)
```suggestion
WG Batch, in cooperation with SIG Autoscaling, SIG Scheduling, SIG Apps and SIG Node) we
```

are working on a multi-cluster job dispatcher project, called
[MultiKueue](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/tree/main/keps/693-multikueue).

In the MultiKueue design, which follows manager-worker architecture, a user
creates a Job in the management cluster, but a mirror-copy of the Job is created
and executed in one of the worker clusters. The status updates of the mirror-Job
are reflected by the Kueue controller in the management cluster, in the status
of the Job created by the user.

In order to support this workflow we need a mechanism to disable the main Job
controller, and delegate the status synchronization to the Kueue controller.

### Goals

- support delegation of Job synchronization to an external controller

### Non-Goals

- passing custom parameters to the external controller

## Proposal

> The proposal is to support the `managed-by` label to indicate the only

Reviewer 8: Use `job.kubernetes.io/managed-by` or similar.

Author: As above

The mechanism should be per-Job, because the management cluster might also be
one of the worker clusters, for two reasons:
1. Disabling the Job controller per cluster requires access to the `kube-controller-manager`
   manifest. Such access is generally discouraged by cloud providers.
2. The management cluster may also be a worker. Supporting this scenario is important
   for smooth transition of Kueue users from a single-cluster to multi-cluster.

Ideally, the mechanism should be lightweight so that it is easy to be adopted
by other Job CRDs supported by Kueue
(see [here](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/blob/6d428f3279a9ca0e204c083dc649dbbc6558db71/config/components/manager/controller_manager_config.yaml#L31-L42)):
MPIJob, RayJob, JobSet, multiple Kubeflow jobs.

It could be handy if the controller can be indicated by Kueue after the Job is
created, but before starting it. In the scenario of role sharing (where the
management cluster is also a worker), it would allow to avoid creation of a
mirror Job within the cluster.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

#### Prior work

This approach of allowing another controller to mirror information between APIs

> is already supported with the `managed-by` label used by

Reviewer 8: Use `job.kubernetes.io/managed-by` or similar; we shouldn't repeat the mistake from EndpointSlice &mdash; especially when we are encouraging external controllers to care about this label.

Author: As above

The implementation is simple (see [Design details](#design-details)), short-circuit the
`syncJob` invocation. Also, since the feature is just label-based, there is
technically no need to go via Alpha in order to ensure that all
kube-apiserver instances (in HA setup, see [here](https://kubernetes.io/releases/version-skew-policy/#supported-version-skew))
recognize the new API, as in case of new fields. A similar approach was used
to graduate the
[Pod Index Label for StatefulSets and Indexed Jobs](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-apps/4017-pod-index-label)
feature with similar characteristics.

Finally, we would like to have the feature soak without unnecessary delay.

#### Can the label be mutable?

There is a potential risk of leaking pods, if the value of the label is changed.
For example, assume there is a running Job, which is reconciled by the Job
controller, and has some pods created.
Then, if the label is switched to the mirroring Kueue controller (which by
itself does not manage pods). Then, the pods are leaking and remain running.

In order to avoid the risk of pods leaking between the controllers when changing

> value of the `managed-by` label, we make the label immutable (allow to be added

Reviewer 8: Use `job.kubernetes.io/managed-by` or similar.

on Job creation, but fail requests trying to update its value, see also
[label mutability](#label-mutability)).

However, the question remains if we can make the label mutable when the job is
stopped, similarly, as we do with the `AllowMutableSchedulingDirectives` flag
which guards mutability of the Job's pod template labels.

It seems possible, and could be handy in [Story 1](#story-1), but it is also not
a blocker.

It would also complicate debuggability of the feature.

We decide to keep the label immutable, at least for [Beta](#beta), we will
re-evaluate the decision for [GA](#ga).

#### Use for MultiKueue

> The `managed-by` label is going to be added by a dedicated MultiKueue webhook

Reviewer 8: Use `job.kubernetes.io/managed-by` or similar.

Author: As above

more involving.
- The MultiKueue controller would have to non-trivially reconcile the Job Status.
If it just blindly mirrored the status from the worker cluster (as currently
planned), then it would remove the condition. Other controllers would need to be
careful not to remove the condition either.
- It requires extra request per job, and risks conflicts for the status Update
requests.

Additionally, notice that the analogous situation takes place when `spec.schedulerName`
does not match a custom scheduling profile. There is no condition indicating that.

#### Event indicating the Job is skipped

Job controller could emit event on the Job creation event indicating the Job
is synchronized by a custom controller. This would not run into the issue with
controllers conflicting on status updates.

**Reasons for discarding/deferring**

Events have expiration time, which is potentially cloud-provider dependent.
It makes them not that useful to debug situations when the Job didn't make
progress for long time. So, they would not give a reliable signal for debugging
based on playbooks.

Renewing the even on every Job update seems excessive from the performance
perspective.

> 

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion

### Use `job.kubernetes.io/managed-by`

```

**But I'd swap this round**. `job.kubernetes.io/managed-by` should be the main proposal unless the
[generic label](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4370/files#r1433055461) idea wins out. Using plain `managed-by` should be what we list as an alternative and then discard.

Why? Because “Kubernetes' official labels are always public” is much easier to teach than ”Kubernetes labels are public, except for X, Y and Z”. The more precedents we set, the more we encourage our project and third parties to use private labels with the eventual risk of key collision and heartache.

Author: Yes, actually the proposed label full name is `batch.kubernetes.io/managed-by` for there reasons. More details in the answer to https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4370#discussion_r1467397596.

Regarding "batch" vs. "job" prefix:

We prefer "batch" prefix for consistency with current labels used by the Job controller (see [here](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/apis/batch/types.go#L29-L46)).

The "batch" prefix fits well for the use case of supporting this label
in other batch Job CRDs supported by Kueue, such as JobSet, MPIJob, RayJob, etc.

I put these considerations in the new Alternatives section. PTAL.

  - it does not reset the status for a Job with `.spec.suspend=false`,
  - it does not add the Suspended condition for a Job with `.spec.suspend=true`.
- the Job controller reconciles jobs with custom "managed-by" label when the feature gate is disabled
- the `job_by_external_controller_total` metric is incremented when a new Job with custom "managed-by" is created
- the `job_by_external_controller_total` metric is not incremented for a new Job without "managed-by" or with default value
- the `job_by_external_controller_total` metric is not incremented for Job updates (regardless of the "managed-by")

During the implementation more scenarios might be covered.

##### e2e tests

The feature does not depend on kubelet, so the functionality can be fully
covered with unit & integration tests.

We propose a single e2e test for the following scenario:
- the Job controller does not reconcile a job with any other value of the "managed-by" label. In particular,
  it does not reset the status for an unsuspended Job.

### Graduation Criteria

#### Beta

- skip synchronization of jobs when the "managed-by" label does not exist, or equals `job-controller.k8s.io`

> - unit & integration tests

Reviewer 5: With beta enabled by default, e2e tests should also be in beta criteria 
  [i.e. we shouldn't be by default giving to users something that we don't test e2e]

Author: Good point, updated. PTAL.

- implement the `job_by_external_controller_total` metric
- implement the additional Job status validation (see [here](#job-status-validation))
- make CronJob more resilient by checking the Job condition is `Complete` when using `CompletionTime` (see [here](#custom-controllers-not-compatible-with-api-assumptions-by-cronjob))
- The feature flag enabled by default

#### GA

- Address reviews and bug reports from Beta users
- e2e test
- Re-evaluate the ideas of improving debuggability (like [extended `kubectl`](#debuggability), [dedicated condition](#condition-to-indicated-job-is-skipped), or [events](#event-indicating-the-job-is-skipped))
- Re-evaluate the support for mutability of the label
- Asses the fragmentation of the ecosystem. Look for other implementations of a job controller and asses their conformance with k8s.
- Lock the feature gate

#### Deprecation

- Remove the feature-gate in GA+2.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

#### Upgrade

An upgrade to a version which supports this feature does not require any
additional configuration changes. This feature is opt-in at the Job-level, so
to use it users need to add the "managed-by" label to their Jobs.

#### Downgrade

> A downgrade to a version which does not support this feature (1.29 an below)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A downgrade to a version which does not support this feature (1.29 and below)
```

indicative that the feature is not working correctly.

A substantial increase in `kube_cronjob_status_active` after upgrade may suggest
that the Jobs are not making progress. Additionally, if the non-progressing
Jobs use custom "managed-by" label, then rollback of the feature might be
justified to make the CronJobs run, by letting the built-in Job controller
handle the Jobs.

A substantial drop in the `job_sync_duration_seconds`, while the number of
jobs with the custom "managed-by" label is low, could be indicative of the
Job controller skipping reconciliation of jobs it should reconcile. This could
be further investigated per-job by looking at the timestamp of changes in
`.metadata.managedFields.time`, and owners in `.metadata.managedFields.manager`.

<!--
What signals should users be paying attention to when the feature is young
that might indicate a serious problem?
-->

###### Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?

<!--
Describe manual testing that was done and the outcomes.
Longer term, we may want to require automated upgrade/rollback tests, but we
are missing a bunch of machinery and tooling and can't do that now.
-->

> It will be tested manually prior to beta launch.

Reviewer 5: Can you (at least briefly) describe the test scenario here?

Author: Sure, updated. PTAL.

- the `job_by_external_controller_total` metric is not incremented for Job updates (regardless of the "managed-by")

During the implementation more scenarios might be covered.

##### e2e tests

The feature does not depend on kubelet, so the functionality can be fully
covered with unit & integration tests.

We propose a single e2e test for the following scenario:
- the Job controller does not reconcile a job with any other value of the "managed-by" label. In particular,
  it does not reset the status for an unsuspended Job.

### Graduation Criteria

#### Beta

- skip synchronization of jobs when the "managed-by" label does not exist, or equals `job-controller.k8s.io`
- unit, integration and e2e tests
- implement the `job_by_external_controller_total` metric
- implement the additional Job status validation (see [here](#job-status-validation))
- make CronJob more resilient by checking the Job condition is `Complete` when using `CompletionTime` (see [here](#custom-controllers-not-compatible-with-api-assumptions-by-cronjob))
- The feature flag enabled by default

#### GA

- Address reviews and bug reports from Beta users

> - e2e test

Reviewer 5: remove (they are already in beta)

Author: done

technically no need to go via Alpha in order to ensure that all
kube-apiserver instances (in HA setup, see [here](https://kubernetes.io/releases/version-skew-policy/#supported-version-skew))
recognize the new API, as in case of new fields. A similar approach was used
to graduate the
[Pod Index Label for StatefulSets and Indexed Jobs](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-apps/4017-pod-index-label)
feature with similar characteristics.

Finally, we would like to have the feature soak without unnecessary delay.

#### Using label selectors

We consider using label selectors by the Job controller to identify the subset
of jobs it should watch. However, due to backwards-compatibility there are two
cases:
1. old jobs without the label
2. new jobs with the label equal to `job-controller`

Using label selectors might be relevant in case of [Story 1](#story-1), as
MultiKueue can have many jobs in the management cluster. Keeping the jobs in
the Job controller's informer, and starting the `syncJob` function for them is
wasteful.

However, the label selector semantics does not support OR-ing these two cases.

> For this reason, we need to ensure all jobs have the label set. One mechanism

Reviewer 5: Why? Can't we just exclude those jobs that have managed-by labels set to some different value?

Author: We can select jobs to be excluded (not synced) by the label selector `managed-by!=job-controller`. But I don't think there is a syntax to "negate it", because we care about the jobs we want to sync ( no `managed-by` OR `managed-by=job-controller`).

Anyway, we give up on the idea of using label selectors, because the ROI is low. I'm discussing this in alternatives.

[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

We support the `managed-by` label as a lightweight mechanism to delegate the Job
synchronization to an external controller.

## Motivation

As a part of [Kueue](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs) (an effort done by
Batch-WG, in cooperation with SIG-Autoscaling, SIG-Scheduling, SIG-Apps and SIG-Node) we
are working on a multi-cluster job dispatcher project, called
[MultiKueue](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/pull/1380).

In the MultiKueue design, which follows manager-worker architecture, a user
creates a Job in the management cluster, but a mirror-copy of the Job is created
and executed in one of the worker clusters. The status updates of the mirror-Job
are reflected by the Kueue controller in the management cluster, in the status
of the Job created by the user.

In order to support this workflow we need a mechanism to disable the main Job
controller, and delegate the status synchronization to the Kueue controller.

### Goals

- support delegation of Job synchronization to an external controller

### Non-Goals

- passing custom parameters to the external controller

## Proposal

> The proposal is to support the `managed-by` label to disabled the Job controller

Author: Fixed the typo, and rephrased. I think this section is to give the proposal overview, and the details can go to "Design details".

>  If the managed-by is job-controller then indeed it will synchronize correct?

correct. the built-in job controller synchronizes it if no label, or the label equals `job-controller`. Otherwise disabled.

from synchronizing jobs with the annotation.

> 

Reviewer 9: Some questions:

- Can this label match more than one controller? E.g., if you have two controllers that are separate with the same name, both get the job mirrored there? And then the first one to schedule gets the final assignment?
- What happens with a JobSet if the Jobs inside get different `managed-by` labels? As long as they don't share a common network or closely work together, that might be a valid use case, but I haven't thought about it more than that.

Author: > Can this label match more than one controller? E.g., if you have two controllers that are separate with the same name, both get the job mirrored there? And then the first one to schedule gets the final assignment?

In principle there is only one Job controller, indicated by the label value. I don't think there are any means in the core k8s to verify this is the case though.

> What happens with a JobSet if the Jobs inside get different managed-by labels? As long as they don't share a common network or closely work together, that might be a valid use case, but I haven't thought about it more than that.

Yes, if you have a JobSet with two sub-jobs, the sub-jobs could use different controllers, technically, yes. I think it is up to users / framework developers to figure out if this is useful for their use-cases.

### User Stories (Optional)

#### Story 1

As a developer of Kueue I want to have Job API which allows me to implement the
MultiKueue design. For this reason I need a way to disable the main Job
controller on the management cluster.

The mechanism should be per-Job, because the management cluster might also be
one of the worker clusters, for two reasons:
1. Disabling the Job controller per cluster requires access the `kube-controller-manager`
   manifest. Such access is generally discouraged by cloud providers.

> 2. The management cluster may also be a worker. Supporting this scenario is important

Reviewer 9: or workers? (more than one)?

Author: No, the management cluster can also be a single worker cluster. One cluster = one worker cluster. But this is a question more about the MultiKueue design itself, which has a dedicated KEP: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/pull/1380

   for smooth transition of Kueue users from a single-cluster to multi-cluster.

Ideally, I prefer the mechanism to be lightweight so that it is easy to be adopted
by other Job CRDs supported by Kueue
(see [here](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/blob/6d428f3279a9ca0e204c083dc649dbbc6558db71/config/components/manager/controller_manager_config.yaml#L31-L42)):
MPIJob, RayJob, JobSet, multiple Kubeflow jobs.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

#### Prior work

> This approach of allowing another controller to mirror information between APIs

Reviewer 9: Could we add links to docs for a few of these other things for the interested reader (and to make sure if they have to search they find the right ones).

Author: Done

is already supported with the `managed-by` label used by
EndpointSlices (`endpointslice.kubernetes.io/managed-by`) and IPAddresses
(`ipaddress.kubernetes.io/managed-by`).

#### Graduating directly to Beta

The implementation is simple (see [Design details](#design-details)), short-circuit the
`syncJob` invocation. Also, since the feature is just label-based, there is
technically no need to go via Alpha in order to ensure that all
kube-apiserver instances (in HA setup, see [here](https://kubernetes.io/releases/version-skew-policy/#supported-version-skew))
recognize the new API, as in case of new fields. A similar approach was used
to graduate the
[Pod Index Label for StatefulSets and Indexed Jobs](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-apps/4017-pod-index-label)
feature with similar characteristics.

> Finally, we would like to have the feature soak without unnecessary delay.

Reviewer 9: :droplet: :droplet:

Author: I'm not sure how to interpret the comment, or if it warrants a response. Let me know what's behind :)

Reviewer 9: No response needed! I was responding to the term "soak" with water.

### Risks and Mitigations

#### Ecosystem fragmentation due to forks

The mechanism to disable the main Job controller opens the door for users to
substitute it with a fork. This may create more fragmentation in the community
as users may prefer to use their forked controllers rather than contribute
upstream.

> 

Reviewer 9: What happens if you add `managed-by` for a controller that doesn't exist, would that be equivalent to setting `suspect=true` and it would hang around until/if the controller exists? Or to flip that scenario, what if the controller does exist but then goes away (what happens to the jobs)? This is the ephemeral worker cluster case.

Author: > What happens if you add managed-by for a controller that doesn't exist, 

Then it is not synchronized by any controller, the status is left stale.

> would that be equivalent to setting suspect=true and it would hang around until/if the controller exists? 

I assume you ask `suspend=true`, no this is not equivalent. See also in alternatives: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/340c1d3d969826baa1dd31e6f6656396b3e76c52/keps/sig-apps/4368-support-managed-by-label-for-batch-jobs/README.md#use-the-specsuspend-field

> Or to flip that scenario, what if the controller does exist but then goes away (what happens to the jobs)?

From the core k8s perspective no difference, the built-in Job controller will skip, what happens with the other controller is out of the control. It is up to the platform administrators to ensure the system is configured properly as a whole.

First, this risk, to some extent, exists even today as admins with access to the
control plane can disable by passing `controllers=-job,*` in the manifest for of

> `kube-controller-manager`.

Reviewer 9: Will wildcards work here too? E.g., if you have `worker-controller-1` and `worker-controller-2` can I do `worker-controller-*` (I had thought special characters didn't work in labels but it might just be `/` that I was testing!)

Author: Check here: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/kube-controller-manager/ (the `--controllers` flag).

In code: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/5104e6566135e05b0b46eea1c068a07388c78044/staging/src/k8s.io/controller-manager/app/helper.go#L60-L80.

Second, we believe that users who had the need to fork the Job controller
already introduced dedicated Job CRDs for their needs.

## Design Details

#### API

```golang
const (
  ...
	// LabelManagedBy is used to indicate the controller or entity that manages
	// an Job.

> 	LabelManagedBy = "batch.kubernetes.io/managed-by"

Reviewer 9: Why a label and not an annotation (less constraint with respect to formatting?) E.g., if in the future we need to extend it to be more than one or some other reason to have special characters.

Author: I think the reason is the ability to identify jobs by kubectl using label selectors. Also, the prior work using the `managed-by` labels. Finally, I think it is reasonable to expect controller names conform to the label / object name validation. I have added a note in the `Alternatives` section.

)
```

#### Implementation overview

We skip synchronization of the Jobs with the `managed-by` label, if it has any
different value than `job-controller`.

There is no validation for the values of the field beyond that of standard
permitted label values.

> 

Reviewer 7: So the main questions I have for this design:

How is the label going to be added? ie pkg/registry?

What do we do about existing labels? And is there any protections on a user removing or adding a label for this?

I guess that a user probably can only patch the jobs in their namespace so they could probably only disable jobs that they have access too.

Reviewer 7: Last thing, what is the expected behavior if a label is added on an existing job? Will we stop syncing the running job?

Author: > How is the label going to be added? ie pkg/registry? default for all jobs?

For MultiKueue, it will be added by the Kueue controller based on its scheduling decision. 

In general, it can be added by end-users or other frameworks.

> default for all jobs?

No defaulting. Discussed it now in alternatives in "Defaulting of the manage-by label for newly created jobs".

> What do we do about existing labels? And is there any protections on a user removing or adding a label for this?

The mutability of labels is controller by `AllowMutableSchedulingDirectives`. I discuss this now in the `Mutability` section.

> I guess that a user probably can only patch the jobs in their namespace so they could probably only disable jobs that they have access too.

In MultiKueue changing the label is up to the Kueue controller. Once the job is running it cannot be flipped, because not mutable then (as other labels).

> Last thing, what is the expected behavior if a label is added on an existing job? Will we stop syncing the running job?

it is not possible to add the label to a running job, because `AllowMutableSchedulingDirectives=false` in this case.

Reviewer 7: So I guess I was confused on where the label is located. If its on the label of a job object (ie metadata) then it is anyone is free to patch or modify anytime. If the label is added on the PodTemplate metadata then that would be covered by `AllowMutableSchedulingDirectives`. That is immutable once a job is running.

Author: Oh, I was actually confused :). Indeed `AllowMutableSchedulingDirectives` applies only to the template currently, while the job will be placed on the top level metadata. Thank you for pointing this out!

In that case I will need to rethink. We either make it immutable, or extend the semantics of `AllowMutableSchedulingDirectives` to cover the particular label in metadata. WDYT?

Author: I think the semantic of `AllowMutableSchedulingDirectives` is actually what we want. Rephrased the "Mutability" section to make it more clear. PTAL.

Author: After a second thought I think I prefer to keep it simple and make the label immutable, at least for the first iteration. Added a graduation criteria to re-evaluate the decision.

Reviewer 7: Yea I think that is fine. So the crux of the change is to define a label, have controllers that create Jobs can populate it, and the Job controller will skip sync.

And we won't allow any changes to this label once the job is created.

Reviewer 7: I would consider adding this to Risks and Mitigation section (as without immutable) this could render the jobs useless.

Author: I'm not sure it should go under Risks and Mitigations since this is a hypothetical risk if the design was different. I put a discussion under the "Notes / Can the label be mutable?" section. PTAL.

Reviewer 7: Thanks. Your updates look good to me! Feel free to resolve.

<!--
Pick one of these and delete the rest.

Documentation is available on [feature gate lifecycle] and expectations, as
well as the [existing list] of feature gates.

[feature gate lifecycle]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/feature-gates.md
[existing list]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/
-->

- [x] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
  - Feature gate name: `JobManagedByLabel`
  - Components depending on the feature gate: `kube-apiserver`, `kube-controller-manager`
- [ ] Other
  - Describe the mechanism:
  - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime of the control
    plane?
  - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime or reprovisioning
    of a node?

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

Yes, the newly created jobs have the `managed-by` label set as `job-controller`

<!--
Any change of default behavior may be surprising to users or break existing
automations, so be extremely careful here.
-->

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

> Yes.

Reviewer 7: When you disable the feature, are we going to remove the label?

Author: No, the label stays but is ignored based on the feature-gate check.

You can take a look at one potential example of such test in:
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/97058/files#diff-7826f7adbc1996a05ab52e3f5f02429e94b68ce6bce0dc534d1be636154fded3R246-R282
-->

Given that this feature doesn't introduce any new API field, enablement/disablement tests will not provide reasonable value and won't be added.

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.
-->

###### How can a rollout or rollback fail? Can it impact already running workloads?

<!--
Try to be as paranoid as possible - e.g., what if some components will restart
mid-rollout?

Be sure to consider highly-available clusters, where, for example,
feature flags will be enabled on some API servers and not others during the
rollout. Similarly, consider large clusters and how enablement/disablement
will rollout across nodes.
-->

The rollout will not impact already running workloads, unless they set the
`managed-by` label to a custom value, but this would require a prior intentional
action.

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

> Users could monitor if there are any jobs which are not reconciled by the

Reviewer 7: What metric for the job controller would show no reconciles?

Reviewer 7: My main point is what do users need to look into to find that jobs are not being reconciled?

This question asks about what metrics an ops person could see if there is something horribly wrong.

So by default, there should be no change with this label. If someone patched the job and skips syncs, can you think of any metrics that could reflect that syncing has stopped? 

Maybe `job_sync_duration_seconds` gets much faster?

I also would assume that `job_syncs_total` increases as the sync duration got faster?

Author: I have added the section, PTAL

Reviewer 7: Looks great!

and operation of this feature.
Recall that end users cannot usually observe component logs or access metrics.
-->

- [ ] Events
  - Event Reason:
- [X] API .metadata
  - Condition name:
  - Other field:
    - `.metadata.labels['batch.kubernetes.io/managed-by']` for Jobs
- [ ] Other (treat as last resort)
  - Details:

###### What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the enhancement?

This feature does not propose SLOs.

<!--
This is your opportunity to define what "normal" quality of service looks like
for a feature.

It's impossible to provide comprehensive guidance, but at the very
high level (needs more precise definitions) those may be things like:
  - per-day percentage of API calls finishing with 5XX errors <= 1%
  - 99% percentile over day of absolute value from (job creation time minus expected
    job creation time) for cron job <= 10%
  - 99.9% of /health requests per day finish with 200 code

These goals will help you determine what you need to measure (SLIs) in the next
question.
-->

###### What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine the health of the service?

<!--
Pick one more of these and delete the rest.
-->

> 

Reviewer 7: I would probably mention that there are no SLIs because this looks like you forgot to fill it out.

Author: Added one point about using the apiserver counter for conflicts. PTAL.

## Design Details

#### API

```golang
const (
  ...
	// LabelManagedBy is used to indicate the controller or entity that manages
	// an Job.
	LabelManagedBy = "batch.kubernetes.io/managed-by"
)
```

#### Implementation overview

We skip synchronization of the Jobs with the `managed-by` label, if it has any
different value than `job-controller.k8s.io`.

There is no validation for the values of the field beyond that of standard
permitted label values.

#### Mutability

We keep the label immutable for the first iteration of [Beta](#beta).
Mutability could be handy for [Story 1](#story-1), but it is not a blocker.

We will re-evaluate the need for mutability (and the actual conditions under
which it is possible), before going [GA](#ga).

### Test Plan

[x] I/we understand the owners of the involved components may require updates to
existing tests to make this code solid enough prior to committing the changes necessary
to implement this enhancement.

##### Prerequisite testing updates

##### Unit tests

- `pkg/controller/job`: `2023-12-20` - `91.5%`
- `pkg/registry/batch/job`: `2023-12-20` - `92.2%`
- `pkg/apis/batch/v1`: `2023-12-20` - `29.3%` (mostly generated code)

> ##### Integration tests

Reviewer 7: Since we identified the immutability of the label, do you want to add an integration test case for that?

Author: Aren't unit tests enough in this case? For example, podFailurePolicy or podReplacementPolicy are immutable, but we don't have integration tests for it, just unit. 

For now, added only in the unit tests section. PTAL.

Reviewer 7: Yes, I was thinking of ElasticJob feature where there are integration tests. But I think unit tests should be enough.

Author: Oh, I see, but there the logic is more complex, and the mutability is the heart of that feature. I'm fine either way, but let me keep as is for now.

control plane can disable by passing `--controllers=-job,*` in the manifest for
`kube-controller-manager` (see more info on the `--controllers` flag
[here](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/kube-controller-manager/)).

Second, we believe that users who had the need to fork the Job controller
already introduced dedicated Job CRDs for their needs.

#### Two controllers running at the same time on old version

It is possible that one configures MultiKueue (or another project) with an
older version of k8s which does not support the label yet. In that case
two controllers might start running and compete with Job status updates at the
same time.

To mitigate this risk we warn about it in Kueue documentation, to use this label
only against newer versions of Kubernetes.

Finally, this risk will fade away with time as the new versions of
Kubernetes support it.

## Design Details

#### API

```golang
const (
  ...
	// LabelManagedBy is used to indicate the controller or entity that manages
	// an Job.
	LabelManagedBy = "batch.kubernetes.io/managed-by"
)
```

#### Implementation overview

> We skip synchronization of the Jobs with the `managed-by` label, if it has any

Reviewer 10: Two comments:
1) Where will we skip it? will we configure the watch to completely ignore those jobs (i.e., not receive sync calls at all) or will we add a check in the sync func? The former seems more performant, but the latter allows us to potentially add a condition as suggested below.

2) Does it make sense to add a condition indicating that the job will not be reconciled and is ignored by the job controller? could be useful for debugging and informs the user what is going on.

Author: Ad 1. I see possible options:
1. At the informer level using label selector, but it does not reduce the memory usage because of SharedInformers in k8s and would require tricky defaulting of the label, more [here](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/72efa2d9759909b6de1460a810a6a4ddc2e6f45d/keps/sig-apps/4368-support-managed-by-label-for-batch-jobs/README.md#using-label-selectors). Also, doesn’t let us add a log line that the sync is skipped
2. Inside `syncJob` - this is was the initial idea, specifically I was thinking about doing it [here](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/909faa3a9b33161992af0684c5582353b5be6d9b/pkg/controller/job/job_controller.go#L733)
3. Inside `enqueueSyncJobInternal`, before calling `jm.queue.AddAfter`, this would be slightly more performant, because we don’t go via the queue.

I’m now slightly leaning towards (3.) over (2.) in order not to waste memory for the entries in the queue. 

Ad 2. We are not planning to add the condition, these are the reasons:
1. Its usability seems limited (compared to the label) if the job is immutable (as currently planned), because the timestamps don’t bring extra value
2. Conceptually, we want to give full ownership of the Job object to the other job controller, objects mutated by two controllers could actually make debugging more involving.
3. The MultiKueue controller would have to non-trivially reconcile the Job Status. If it just blindly mirrored the status from the worker cluster (as currently planned), then it would remove the condition. Other controllers would need to be careful not to remove the condition either.
4. This means extra QPS per job, and risks conflicts for the status Update operations.
5. if other (non built-in) controllers were to indicate that they skip with a condition, we would have many conditions

Debugging is important , for this purpose we will log the line saying that the syncing is delegated to another controller (available to admins / OnCalls). The user can list jobs with custom value of the label, for example by `kubectl get jobs -lbatch.kubernetes.io/managed-by -ocustom-columns=NAME:.metadata.name,LABEL:".metadata.labels.batch\.kubernetes\.io/managed-by"`. Then, `kubectl get jobs -oyaml --show-managed-fields` can be useful to figure out what modifies the fields.

Let me know what are your thoughts, I will also follow up with KEP update in case other readers have similar questions.

Author: Updated the KEP accordingly PTAL.

Reviewer 10: > I’m now slightly leaning towards (3.) over (2.) in order not to waste memory for the entries in the queue.

Make sense.

> We are not planning to add the condition, these are the reasons:

I am not going to push for a condition because it adds some complexity, so I will leave the decision to you; but the five reasons listed above are not very convincing :) Re1: it is certainly useful for the end user to know why their job is seemingly "stuck". Re 2: we have plenty of objects statuses updated by multiple components within k8s, including pods. Re 3: I don't think it will be "non-trivial", we just need to merge the conditions map on update. Re 4: that is fine, one update over the lifetime of the job is certainly not a problem. Re 5: do we really think we will have that situation? I very much doubt it. I don't think anyone will be implementing a full fledged secondary job controller.

Author: @ahg-g thanks for the discussion, I think this is a reasonable idea, and I'm happy to go this path if we conclude this is they best way to address debuggability, despite the drawbacks listed, indirectly also reflecting the complexity you mentioned.  I think it is fair to abandon my point 5. 

So the scenario is that the job is "stuck", and goes looking at the conditions with `kubectl get job -oyaml` or `kubectl describe job` commands. Seeing something like this
```
Type: ManagedByCustomController
Status: True
Reason: CustomManagedByLabel
Message: This Job is managed by a custom controller as it has the managed-by label. 
```
would be more telling than a label, as the users often omit inspection of labels (there are many labels, and they don't know the semantics of them). So, there is indeed a trade-off.

OTOH, maybe the concern could be addressed to some extent by the following:
1. documentation warning that jobs with the custom value of the labels are skipped
2. log line (yeah, just for OnCall or admins)
3. the other controller such as MultiKueue adding the condition that it takes control, or emitting an event for the Job (would not be added if say MultiKueue is not installed on the cluster)
4. extra kubectl get column `MANAGED_BY` listing value of the label
5. extra `kubectl describe` line, say This Job is managed by a custom controller as it has the managed-by label."

WDYT? I would also like to hear from others.

Author: Ok, I don't feel like having a strong opinion, just not sure currently about the trade-offs. I will openly wait for more feedback. Updated the KEP with the point to re-evaluate different options before going GA.

Reviewer: I'll put another :+1: for a condition. For cases like typos in the label it'll be more convenient for users to figure out what's going on. Also, if you're thinking about operating big clusters, or multiple clusters I don't like the idea of involving cluster admins with debugging every stuck job. The controller is responsible for exposing as much information to the user as possible. The cost vs value here is negligible with our current possibilities (patch on .status.conditions).

Author: Thanks for the input!

One more thing which keeps me hesitant is that we have a similar case for `spec.schedulerName`, for which don't add the condition (nor event) when there is a custom value. Similarly, typos may occur, and the consequences are similar, as the pod might get stuck pending. Also similarly, the field is immutable. 

I would yet like to hear what makes the Job case different. 

One potential difference I see is that this is intended for multi-clluster Kueue, so every bit to improve debuggability matters. Let me know if there is another relevant difference point I might be missing.

Author: I also realize that the concern (3.) about MultiKueue controller can be mitigated completely by a validation rule inside k8s, that the condition cannot be deleted once added, so the rule would give early feedback to framework developers.

Reviewer 3: It's a bit weird for a controller to add a condition to something saying it is ignoring it because the object opted out of management by the standard controller… I don't think we decorate pods that use a non-default scheduler or endpointslices marked as managed by some other controller

Reviewer 10: Just for the sake of discussion, not really to push to add the condition. I look at it differently: explaining an unexpected job state. I don't think people look closely at endpointslices if at all, and it is not uncommon to have a second scheduler or multiple scheduling profiles that set different scheduler names. In this case though, my feeling is that we will highly highly unlikely that we will have a second implementation of the job controller, in fact this proposal is not primarily motivated by that, so making it clear that the local controller is not reconciling it seems useful to me.

Reviewer: The condition is definitely not a blocker for beta, but I'd like to see it explicitly called out before GA, so we have a clear decision for yes/no having one.

different value than `job-controller.k8s.io`.

There is no validation for the values of the field beyond that of standard

> permitted label values.

Reviewer 10: Does it make sense to add a condition indicating that the job will not be reconciled and is ignored by the job controller? could be useful for debugging and informs the user what is going on.

The implementation is simple (see [Design details](#design-details)), short-circuit the
`syncJob` invocation. Also, since the feature is just label-based, there is
technically no need to go via Alpha in order to ensure that all
kube-apiserver instances (in HA setup, see [here](https://kubernetes.io/releases/version-skew-policy/#supported-version-skew))
recognize the new API, as in case of new fields. A similar approach was used
to graduate the
[Pod Index Label for StatefulSets and Indexed Jobs](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-apps/4017-pod-index-label)
feature with similar characteristics.

Finally, we would like to have the feature soak without unnecessary delay.

#### Can the label be mutable?

There is a potential risk of leaking pods, if the value of the label is changed.
For example, assume there is a running Job, which is reconciled by the Job
controller, and has some pods created.
Then, if the label is switched to the mirroring Kueue controller (which by
itself does not manage pods). Then, the pods are leaking and remain running.

In order to avoid the risk of pods leaking between the controllers when changing

> value of the `managed-by` label, we make the label immutable (see also

Reviewer 4: To be concrete, we will allow setting the label only when the job is created? And error on any future updates?

Author: Correct, added a short note to make this explicit

a blocker.

It would also the complicate debuggability of the feature.

We decide to keep the label immutable, at least for [Beta](#beta), we will
re-evaluate the decision for [GA](#ga).

### Risks and Mitigations

#### Ecosystem fragmentation due to forks

The mechanism to disable the main Job controller opens the door for users to
substitute it with a fork. This may create more fragmentation in the community
as users may prefer to use their forked controllers rather than contribute
upstream.

First, this risk, to some extent, exists even today as admins with access to the
control plane can disable by passing `--controllers=-job,*` in the manifest for
`kube-controller-manager` (see more info on the `--controllers` flag
[here](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/kube-controller-manager/)).

Second, we believe that users who had the need to fork the Job controller
already introduced dedicated Job CRDs for their needs.

#### Two controllers running at the same time on old version

It is possible that one configures MultiKueue (or another project) with an
older version of k8s which does not support the label yet. In that case

> two controllers might start running and compete with Job status updates at the

Reviewer 4: It might be worth adding that this can also happen when a feature is disabled to this section.

Author: Sure, added a note about that scenario

Reviewer 4: thx

same time.

To mitigate this risk we warn about it in Kueue documentation, to use this label
only against newer versions of Kubernetes.

Finally, this risk will fade away with time as the new versions of
Kubernetes support it.

## Design Details

#### API

```golang
const (
  ...
	// LabelManagedBy is used to indicate the controller or entity that manages
	// an Job.
	LabelManagedBy = "batch.kubernetes.io/managed-by"
)
```

#### Implementation overview

We skip synchronization of the Jobs with the `managed-by` label, if it has any
different value than `job-controller.k8s.io`. When the synchronization is skipped,

> the name of the controller managing the Job object is logged.

Reviewer 4: > Debugging is important , for this purpose we will log the line saying that the syncing is delegated to another controller (available to admins / OnCalls).

Logs might be overlooked. Wouldn't emitting an event be better for the debugging?

If we have the event immutable once the object is created, we can fire the event on creation only. Or we could fire it on change of the label.

Author: Emitting events seems like an idea worth considering. However they expire, and I imagine in most cases users would want to inspect their jobs after they were stuck for a significant amount of time. Renewing the event on every update might be adding too much of performance penalty. So, when playbooks are written to investigate if a job is stuck, then events wouldn't be a very reliable source of information. 

One good thing about using events is that they get displayed in `kubectl` describe. I think we can achieve this by modifying the `kubectl` describe to add a human readable information on the bottom, based on the label value.

Reviewer 4: I agree, firing the event repeatedly on syncs would not be very beneficial.  Even though the events are transient, single event emission might still help to debug the problem in some cases. Also, there is a precedent for firing events in similar scenarios in our controllers.

There is also another drawback for users who would use this feature often, they might find the events spammy.

Author: > Also, there is a precedent for firing events in similar scenarios in our controllers.

could you provide an example? One situation similar to what we do is custom `spec.schedulerName`, but I tested and we don't seem to fire events if the value is non-default.

>  they might find the events spammy.

I think is a valid concern for repeatedly fired event on every sync.

Reviewer 4: > could you provide an example? One situation similar to what we do is custom spec.schedulerName, but I tested and we don't seem to fire events if the value is non-default.

I did not mean for this specific use case, but that we use events in general to communicate abnormal cases/behaviour. Like here:

https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/fbb2e6293fb0c8c107ae48b8b8ae488325c59598/pkg/controller/disruption/disruption.go#L587-L589

Author: I see, but the situation you reference is a warning, so seems justified to be spammy to let the user know. 

In this case of `managed-by` it would be spammy in the happy path.

We leave the particular place at which the synchronization is skipped as
implementation detail which can be determined during the implementation phase,
however, two candidate places are:
1. inside `syncJob` function
2. inside `enqueueSyncJobInternal` function

Note that, if we skip inside `enqueueSyncJobInternal` we may save on some memory
needed to needlessly enqueue the Job keys.

There is no validation for the values of the field beyond that of standard
permitted label values.

#### Label mutability

We keep the label immutable. See also the discussion in
[Can the label be mutable?](#can-the-label-be-mutable).

### Test Plan

[x] I/we understand the owners of the involved components may require updates to
existing tests to make this code solid enough prior to committing the changes necessary
to implement this enhancement.

##### Prerequisite testing updates

> ##### Unit tests

Reviewer 4: > Given that this feature doesn't introduce any new API field, enablement/disablement tests will not provide reasonable value and won't be added.

Shouldn't we test disabling/enabling this feature when there are some jobs with this label set? It seems it might cause incorrect behavior when handling a control from one controller to another. This may be unavoidable, but at least having a test on our end that we are syncing the jobs again could be useful.

Author: It makes sense definitely, thank you for pointing out. I have added a note to the unit tests. PTAL.

Reviewer 4: looks ok, thx

-->

- [x] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
  - Feature gate name: `JobManagedByLabel`
  - Components depending on the feature gate: `kube-apiserver`, `kube-controller-manager`
- [ ] Other
  - Describe the mechanism:
  - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime of the control
    plane?
  - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime or reprovisioning
    of a node?

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

No.

<!--
Any change of default behavior may be surprising to users or break existing
automations, so be extremely careful here.
-->

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

Yes.

<!--
Describe the consequences on existing workloads (e.g., if this is a runtime
feature, can it break the existing applications?).

Feature gates are typically disabled by setting the flag to `false` and
restarting the component. No other changes should be necessary to disable the
feature.

NOTE: Also set `disable-supported` to `true` or `false` in `kep.yaml`.
-->

###### What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?

> The feature behaves as if it was enabled for the first time.

Reviewer 4: Can we mention that a conflict can happen between the controllers when a label was set here as well?

Author: Could you explain the scenario, what type of conflict?

Reviewer 4: to just link or highlight the `Two controllers running at the same time on old version` section again

Author: We may get to controllers running when the feature is disabled, but IIUC this question is about the situation when the feature enabled (re-enabled). To enable (or re-enable) the feature it needs to be already supported, so the version isn't "old", as in the risk section.

Reviewer 4: yeah, I meant only the newly added part

```
Note that an analogous situation may happen when the version of Kubernetes
already supports the label, but the feature gate is disabled in `kube-controller-manager`.
```

Author: Sorry, I'm still confused. Do you mean when the feature is re-enabled on kube-apiserver, but remains disabled on kube-controller-manager?

Reviewer 4: I had in mind only the rollback part, so users are aware that it may cause clash of the new controllers. It might be better to just make a short mention in the `Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled` section instead of here.

Author: I see, makes sense now, added a note along the lines to the suggested section. PTAL.

Reviewer 4: looks good, but it may be better to be more concrete. 

`the service health` -> `the health of a job and its controller`

Reviewer 4: much better, thanks

rollout. Similarly, consider large clusters and how enablement/disablement
will rollout across nodes.
-->

The rollout will not impact already running workloads, unless they set the
`managed-by` label to a custom value, but this would require a prior intentional
action.

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

A substantial increase in the `apiserver_request_total[code=409, resource=job, group=batch]`,
while there are jobs with the custom `managed-by` label, can be indicative of
the built-in job controller stepping onto another controller, causing conflicts.
This can be further investigate per-job by checking the `.metadata.managedFields.manager`
being flipped between two owners.

The feature is opt-in so in case of such problems the custom `managed-by` label
should not be used.

A substantial drop in the `job_sync_duration_seconds`, while the number of
jobs with the custom `managed-by` label is low, could be indicative of the
Job controller skipping reconciliation of jobs it should reconcile. This could
be further investigated per-job by looking at the timestamp of changes in
`.metadata.managedFields.time`, and owners in `.metadata.managedFields.manager`.

> 

Reviewer 4: If this feature has an impact on the cronjob controller, it might be worth having metrics on that too.

Reviewer: I was actually considering adding a separate metric for external controllers.

Author: I think a new metric to capture external controllers is a good idea, but I would do it at the Job level, rather than CronJob. The reason is that when using CronJob, the job template may not have the `managed-by` label, but the label is later added by the MultiKueue webhook, so the metric could be even misleading.

So maybe:
- `by_external_controller_total` counter with label `name` (corresponding to the value of `managed-by`), not counted when the feature is disabled or the value points to the built-in controller.

WDYT? I will update the KEP accordingly.

Reviewer 4: IIUC, that metric sounds useful

For cronjob controller, we could also observe [kube_cronjob_status_active](https://github.com/kubernetes/kube-state-metrics/blob/90bd24f27c618ce916db4cd9da34d854d49db5b6/internal/store/cronjob.go#L132) metric and measure an increase in the active jobs value for a known set of jobs. Or measure an increase in the amount of time the jobs should be running. Either of these would indicate that some jobs are not progressing or syncing the status incorrectly. Similar thing can also be done one level lower for the jobs.

Reviewer 4: If this were for just a job it would probably only be a Troubleshooting since we are not responsible for the external controllers. But a CronJob depends on these jobs and they can affect its health, so it probably belongs here IMO.

Author: I see, added a paragraph about this case. PTAL

Reviewer 4: thx

Reviewer: > * `job_by_external_controller_total` counter with label `name`

:+1:

      how can an operator troubleshoot without logging into a master or worker node?
    - Mitigations: What can be done to stop the bleeding, especially for already
      running user workloads?
    - Diagnostics: What are the useful log messages and their required logging
      levels that could help debug the issue?
      Not required until feature graduated to beta.
    - Testing: Are there any tests for failure mode? If not, describe why.
-->

###### What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?

N/A.

## Implementation History

- 2023-12.20 - First version of the KEP

<!--
Major milestones in the lifecycle of a KEP should be tracked in this section.
Major milestones might include:
- the `Summary` and `Motivation` sections being merged, signaling SIG acceptance
- the `Proposal` section being merged, signaling agreement on a proposed design
- the date implementation started
- the first Kubernetes release where an initial version of the KEP was available
- the version of Kubernetes where the KEP graduated to general availability
- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->

## Drawbacks

<!--
Why should this KEP _not_ be implemented?
-->

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer 11: Did you consider creating a `MultiKueueJob`, which if it should execute in a cluster creates a standard `Job`, otherwise just reports status?

Author: Yes, we considered it. This is discussed in this section: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/3668581c0b9091d191c558cfcddea566fd7ff85e/keps/sig-apps/4368-support-managed-by-label-for-batch-jobs/README.md#custom-wrapping-crd. 

I would say the major reason is the friction to users who would need to transition from using Job to use MultiClusterJob. We want the transition to be transparent to the users.

Also, we want an approach that is easily transerrable between different Job frameworks. Currently, Kueue supports MPIJob, RayJob, etc. We don't want to invest in MultiKueue CRD per Job CRD.

Also, just added a point that this would not be compatible with CronJob, which we want to support. Unless we have kueue.MultiCluterCronJob, but it all means proliferation of CRDs.
